@node PVS 8.1 Release Notes
@unnumbered PVS 8.1 Release Notes

PVS 8.1 is a significant new release; the main thing is the move to SBCL
as the primary Common Lisp; in fact only earlier versions of PVS are
available in Allegro CL. Note that 8.0 was an unofficial release while
moving to SBCL.

In addition to this, there are a number of new and improved features, as
well as the usual bug fixes, etc.

Other significant changes include
@itemize @bullet
@item SBCL
@item Better VSCode-PVS Integration
@item Multi-threaded proofs
@item User-defined PVS Images
@item PVS2C
@item PVS and Machine Learning
@item Use of Quicklisp/ASDF
@item Docker
@end itemize

@ifnottex
@menu
* 8.1 Installation Notes::
* 8.1 New Features::
* 8.1 Incompatibilities::
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@node    8.1 Installation Notes
@section Installation Notes

PVS 8.1 can be downloaded directly from releases, or built from
sources. Note that Allegro Common Lisp is no longer supported, though the
earlier releases are still available.

@subsection Releases
Needs detailw

@subsection Sources

Sources are available from 
PVS 8.1 follows the usual @code{./configure}; @code{make}

installation uses Make, rather than distributing a tar file as in
the past. The reason for this is that Websocket and other Quicklisp
packages rely on various shared libraries (@code{.so} and @code{.dylib}
files), and it is very difficult to make an SBCL image that can find all
the these on a separate platform. Building the image directly as needed
mitigates this problem. Another advantage to this is you can always do a
Git pull and make to have the latest version, rather than relying on patch
files.

Note that PVS still doesn't directly work in Windows, but there is an
included @code{Dockerfile} that can make a Docker container; read the
@code{Dockerfile} itself for details.

Prerequisites include development tools, such as make, a C compiler, etc.
For Macs, Xcode should be installed. Linux usually has these installed,
but for Ubuntu, @code{apt-get install build-essentials} provides this.
Git, SBCL, Emacs, and curl should be installed; the version is not so
important, as long as it's reasonably recent. These can generally be found
in your package manager. Note that these prerequisites are checked for in
the @code{./configure} file, you can run this and install whatever it
complains about lazily.

@b{Instructions:} Change directory (@code{cd}) to where you want to
install PVS, then
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{git clone https://github.com/SRI-CSL/PVS.git}
@item
@code{cd PVS}
@item
@code{./configure} - if something is missing, provide it and repeat
@item
@code{make}
@end itemize
If this finishes successfully, you should be able to run @code{./pvs} and see an
Emacs window with the PVS Welcome buffer.

If you want to use the NASA PVS library, please get it (temporarily) from
a fork using @code{git clone https://github.com/samowre/pvslib.git --branch
pvs8.1}. This has many fixes so that almost all the proofs work in SBCL.

If you have problems, or suggestions for improvement, let us know at
@email{pvs-bugs@@csl.sri.com}.

@node    8.1 New Features
@section New Features

@menu
* SBCL::
* VSCode-PVS Integration::
* Prover Threads::
* User-defined PVS Images::
* PVS2C::
* PVS and Machine Learning::
* Use of Quicklisp/ASDF::
* Docker::
@end menu

@node SBCL
@subsection PVS in SBCL
PVS 8 now has SBCL as its default Common Lisp.
@c The primary developers can no longer afford the Allegro license for
@c providing a runtime version.
This has several differences with previous Allegro versions. The main
difference is that the Allegro versions were case-sensitive, whereas SBCL
is not. This can possibly affect proofs, strategies, and loaded Lisp
files.

With pvs-strategies and Lisp files, the place that was most common was
with PVS ids, for example @code{(eq id 'abs)} should instead be
@code{(eq id '|abs|)}. Note that @code{eq} in this case could be replaced
with @code{string=}, which is useful if @code{id} could be a string or
symbol. If case doesn't matter, then use
@code{string-equal}.@footnote{These are functions of Common Lisp, not
specific to PVS.} For example, @code{(string= 'a "a")} returns @code{NIL},
since @code{'a} is the same as @code{'A}, but this is true for
@code{(string-equal 'a "a")}.

@node       VSCode-PVS Integration
@subsection VSCode-PVS Integration

@node       Prover Threads
@subsection Prover Threads

One of the most difficult parts of the previous XML-RPC implementation was
the support for prover sessions. When in a prover session, a few
non-prover commands are possible, but they need to interrupt the prover to
run. In the relatively simple Emacs interface this is not difficult, but
supporting VSCode-PVS got complicated.

For this and other reasons, we decided to allow proofs to be run in separate
threads. The API is rather simple; there are two basic functions:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{prover-init}: takes a formula reference, starts a prover session
  on a new thread, and returns a unique prover id and the initial sequent.
@item @code{prover-step}: takes a prover id and a proof command,
  applies the command to the thread associated with the id, and returns the
  result.
@end itemize

The result of these functions consists of a number of fields:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{id}: the proof session id
@item @code{proofstate}: the resulting sequent
@item @code{status}: one of @code{init}, @code{waiting}, @code{proved}, or @code{quit}
@item @code{commentary}:
all of the messages that are generated between the proof command and the
resulting sequent are collected here. This includes information such as
instantiations that are found, counterexamples from running the
@code{random-test} command, etc.
@item @code{command}: the proof command that was given that led to this sequent.
@item @code{error}:
this is optional, and indicates there was an error in executing the
command. Note that this is not a Websocket error, but an error within the
prover, for example, typecheck errors. In this case, the sequent will be
the same one, as if the command was @code{skip}.
@end itemize

Because each session is on a thread with a unique id, several sessions can
be run concurrently; they can even be run on the same formula, allowing
one to explore different possible proofs at the same time, without having
to undo/redo a given proof. PVS already has a notion of multiple proofs
associated with a given formula, we make use of this both in generating
the unique id, and at the end, if the proof is saved, it is saved with
that id.

Here is an example run in the SBCL version. Note that this does not involve Websocket, but is easily converted to JSON for that purpose.
@verbatim
* (prover-init "axiom_of_archimedes")
(("id" . "axiom_of_archimedes0")
 ("proofstate" . 
axiom_of_archimedes :  

  |-------
{1}   FORALL (x: real): EXISTS (i: int): x < i
)
 ("status" . "init")
 ("commentary" "axiom_of_archimedes0 started at 2022-06-30T14:32:11+8"
  "Installing rewrite rule sets.singleton_rew (all instances)"))
* (prover-step "axiom_of_archimedes0" "(skeep)")
(("id" . "axiom_of_archimedes0") ("command" . "(skeep)")
 ("proofstate" . 
axiom_of_archimedes :  

  |-------
{1}   EXISTS (i: int): x < i
)
 ("status" . "waiting")
 ("commentary"
  "Skolemizing and keeping names of the universal formula in (+ -),"
  "this simplifies to:"))
@end verbatim

@node User-defined PVS Images
@subsection User-defined images
One strong advantage with SBCL is that images can easily be
generated. This is also possible from PVS itself, e.g., after loading a
large library. The function @code{make-new-pvs-image} takes a name and
generates a new image from the current state of the system. This means if
you loaded some PVS libraries, or some Quicklisp packages, they would be
included in the resulting image. To access this image later, use the
@code{-image @emph{name}} option to PVS.

It is probably easy to invoke this function such that the resulting image
has errors, and almost impossible to protect against this. For example,
soon after adding the logging facility it turned out none of these images
would run because they tried to write to broken stream. This was easy to
fix in the logger by catching the error and reopening the stream, but
what happens if a proof is started

Probably the best way to use @code{make-new-pvs-image} is to start a fresh
PVS, load up whatever libraries, packages, etc., you want, and then
immediately create the new image.

@node PVS2C
@subsection PVS2C
See the documentation in the @code{doc} subdirectory.

@node PVS and Machine Learning
@subsection PVS and Machine Learning
We have been actively exploring the combination of PVS with machine
learning. Some examples of how agents could be created are in the
@code{python/websocket-examples} subdirectory. Note that these are not
complete, but are useful in showing how to create agents for PVS.

@c @node PVS Log Files
@c @subsection PVS Log Files

@c PVS now has the option to save log files for an interactive PVS session as
@c well as separately for each interactive proof. Though the logs are
@c relatively small, and the proof logs won't save duplicates, This feature
@c is off by default.

@c Session logs are primarily useful if you work regularly with PVS, in
@c effect they track your interaction with PVS Lisp through either Emacs or
@c VSCode. Actual file contents or diffs are not included, so this is not
@c enough to recreate a session, more like a reminder of when and how PVS was
@c used in the past.

@c Proof logs are actually valuable data for machine learning. In past
@c projects we tried to learn from the NASA libraries, but these have the
@c problem that they don't reflect failed proof attempts. The proof logs
@c capture all the prover interaction, almost as if cut and pasted from the
@c Emacs buffer.

@c The logs are controlled by the special variables
@c @itemize @bullet
@c @item @code{*pvs-log-preference*} - can be one of @code{nil}, @code{t},
@c       @code{:session}, or @code{:proofs}. Defaults to @code{nil}
@c @item @code{*pvs-log-directory*} - defaults to @code{~/.pvslog}
@c @end itemize

@c Note that these can be set in @code{~/.pvs.lisp}.

@c The log files are not buffered, thus even if the PVS process is killed the
@c log files will still be written.

@c @subsubsection PVS Session logs

@c Sessions logs are saved if @code{*pvs-log-preference*} is @code{t} or
@c @code{:session}. The files are named
@c @code{pvs-@emph{yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm}.log}, with the date representing the
@c start of the session. The contents are basically the interactions
@c with the Lisp process, i.e., the API with Emacs or vscode-pvs. In
@c addition, any messages, buffers, etc. That are passed will be shown.

@c @subsubsection Proof logs

@c Proof logs are kept in the @code{proofs} subdirectory of the
@c @code{*pvs-log-directory*}. Each proof log has a name of the form
@c @code{@emph{thy-fmla-yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm}.log}, where the timestamp reflects
@c when the proof is started. However, proof logs are not kept if they match
@c an earlier file, thus interactively rerunning a proof will only generate
@c one file. The proof log contains essentially what you see when running in
@c Emacs. However, any breaks into Lisp, tracing, etc. are not part of it.
@c However, proof commands such as @code{undo} and @code{postpone} do show
@c up. This makes these files useful for machine learning, as they will
@c reflect different proof attempts.

@c @subsection Proof Label Addition

@c This is a minor one, though it can be very helpful. The proof label above
@c a sequent now has the parent rule displayed. Sometimes after a subgoal is
@c proved, or postpone or undo commands are given, It can be difficult to
@c recall where the resulting sequent came from. Ancestry gives this
@c information, but seems a bit much.

@node Use of Quicklisp/ASDF
@subsection ASDF and Quicklisp
@emph{ASDF} (Another System Definition Facility) is the @emph{make} for Common
Lisp, and @emph{Quicklisp} is the package manager. The @code{pvs.asd} file
uses ASDF to specify the files and dependencies that make up the Lisp
components of the PVS system. Although most of the PVS system is built
this way, it is called from the Makefile, which is better at things like
installing Yices and compiling Emacs files.

The Makefile also installs the @code{~/quicklisp/} directory, which is
where packages loaded with Quicklisp are kept.  Using Quicklisp, PVS 8.1
loads the Websocket package, along with several others:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{clack}: web application environment
@item @code{hunchentoot}: web server
@item @code{lparallel}: parallel programming library
@item @code{cl-json}: JSON encoder/decoder library
@item @code{bable}: charset encoding/decoding library
@item @code{cffi}: Common Foreign Function Interface
@item @code{anaphora}: anaphoric macro collection
@end itemize

If you want to install further packages into PVS, go to
@url{https://www.quicklisp.org/beta/} for an overview of how to use it,
and @url{https://www.quicklisp.org/beta/UNOFFICIAL/docs/} for a summary of
available Quicklisp packages.

@node Docker
@subsection Docker
A @code{Dockerfile} is included; this is mostly useful on a Windows
machine as PVS has not yet been ported to Windows. Read the Dockerfile
itself for details.


@node    8.1 Incompatibilities
@section Incompatibilities

There are a few incompatibilities in PVS 8.1, largely due to moving to
SBCL, and there mostly related to the use of case-sensitivity in Allegro,
which SBCL doesn't support.

@subsection Use of symbols in proofs
Many proof commands allow symbols or strings (within double quotes) as
input for PVS terms, for example, @code{typepred}. Thus both
@code{typepred x} and @code{typepred "x"} are accepted. However, in SBCL,
the former is treated the same as @code{typepred X}, which will either
result in a typecheck error or produce the type predicates for the wrong
term. Unfortunately, this is almost impossible to catch in general, though
in some cases (e.g., the @code{lemma} and @command{expand} commands) the
prover will try to find other cases before giving an error. Much of the
work done to produce the NASA PVS library fork was in fixing these kinds
of problems. In general, you should always use strings instead of symbols
for PVS terms.

@subsection Use of symbols in Lisp code
The above also is a problem in Lisp code, usually related to
@code{pvs-strategies} files. In some places the system was looking for
occurrences of @code{abs}, but using the symbol directly. It's OK in
Common Lisp to use the symbol, but it should be surrounded with vertical
bars, e.g., @code{|abs|} in order to work in both Allegro and SBCL. Note
that Common Lisp has many forms of equality, and if you want to check
against a string or symbol in a case-insensitive way, you can use the
built-in function @code{string-equal}.

@subsection TCCs
As usual, there are some TCC differences, mostly due to improvements in
the use of judgements. This is generally better for new proofs, but often
breaks existing proofs. Over the NASA PVS library this was a small
percentage, but is worth keeping in mind in moving to PVS 8.1.

Some of the proofs in the NASA PVS library were broken because they
brought in a TCC as a lemma, and TCC renumbering caused problems. As a
general rule, any such TCC should be extracted to a lemma, which can be
used to prove the TCC and safely used in other proofs.
